---
tags: [
  python,
]
---
That Python mangles class attributes named like `__name`:

> Python mangles these names with the class name: if class `Foo` has an attribute named `__a`, it cannot be accessed by `Foo.__a`.
> (An insistent user could still gain access by calling `Foo._Foo__a`.)
> Generally, double leading underscores should be used only to avoid name conflicts with attributes in classes designed to be subclassed.
>
> Note: there is some controversy about the use of `__names` (see below).
>
> -- https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/#method-names-and-instance-variables

> #### [Designing for Inheritance](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/#designing-for-inheritance)
> 
> Always decide whether a class’s methods and instance variables
> (collectively: “attributes”) should be public or non-public.  If in
> doubt, choose non-public; it’s easier to make it public later than to
> make a public attribute non-public.
>
> Public attributes are those that you expect unrelated clients of your
> class to use, with your commitment to avoid backwards incompatible
> changes.  Non-public attributes are those that are not intended to be
> used by third parties; you make no guarantees that non-public
> attributes won’t change or even be removed.
>
> We don’t use the term “private” here, since no attribute is really
> private in Python (without a generally unnecessary amount of work).
>
> Another category of attributes are those that are part of the
> “subclass API” (often called “protected” in other languages).  Some
> classes are designed to be inherited from, either to extend or modify
> aspects of the class’s behavior.  When designing such a class, take
> care to make explicit decisions about which attributes are public,
> which are part of the subclass API, and which are truly only to be
> used by your base class.
>
> With this in mind, here are the Pythonic guidelines:
>
>  - Public attributes should have no leading underscores.
>  - If your public attribute name collides with a reserved keyword,
> append a single trailing underscore to your attribute name.  This is
> preferable to an abbreviation or corrupted spelling.  (However,
> notwithstanding this rule, ‘cls’ is the preferred spelling for any
> variable or argument which is known to be a class, especially the
> first argument to a class method.)
>    
>    Note 1: See the argument name recommendation above for class methods.
>  - For simple public data attributes, it is best to expose just the
> attribute name, without complicated accessor/mutator methods.  Keep
> in mind that Python provides an easy path to future enhancement,
> should you find that a simple data attribute needs to grow
> functional behavior.  In that case, use properties to hide
> functional implementation behind simple data attribute access
> syntax.
>    
>    Note 1: Try to keep the functional behavior side-effect free,
> although side-effects such as caching are generally fine.
>
>    Note 2: Avoid using properties for computationally expensive
> operations; the attribute notation makes the caller believe that
> access is (relatively) cheap.
>  - If your class is intended to be subclassed, and you have attributes
> that you do not want subclasses to use, consider naming them with
> double leading underscores and no trailing underscores.  This
> invokes Python’s name mangling algorithm, where the name of the
> class is mangled into the attribute name.  This helps avoid
> attribute name collisions should subclasses inadvertently contain
> attributes with the same name.
>    
>    Note 1: Note that only the simple class name is used in the mangled
> name, so if a subclass chooses both the same class name and attribute
name, you can still get name collisions.
>
>   
>    Note 2: Name mangling can make certain uses, such as debugging and
> `__getattr__()`, less convenient.  However the name mangling
> algorithm is well documented and easy to perform manually.
>
>    
>    Note 3: Not everyone likes name mangling.  Try to balance the
> need to avoid accidental name clashes with potential use by
> advanced callers.
>
> -- https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/#designing-for-inheritance
