---
tags: [
  haskell,
]
---
During some research on build systems, I began re-reading Build Systems a la Carte ([repo][repo], [paper][paper]).
I found the Haskell even more confusing than I remembered, so I set out to translate the Haskell types to Typescript, Rust, and other type systems I know.
When I got into the translation, I realized I only know enough to get the _vibe_ of what Haskell code's saying :/.

The following are my notes on the 2021 open-source update to _[Learn You A Haskell for Great Good][site]_.

## Starting out

https://learnyouahaskell.github.io/starting-out.html#an-intro-to-lists

What is the underlying datatype of a list? A linked list? Growable `Vec<T>`?

> `++`
> `:`

I already need a language server for figuring out operator definitions.

List comprehension syntax:
```hs
[ output var | var <- inputSet]
-- ^^^^^^^^^ 
-- the output function

-- also valid:
[ output var | var <- inputSet, filterFn var, otherFilterFn var]
-- also valid:
triangles = [ (a,b,c) | c <- [1..10], b <- [1..10], a <- [1..10] ]
```

Lists are homogenous, tuples can be heterogenous.

Range syntax seems to be the same as Rust.

## [Types & Typeclasses](https://learnyouahaskell.github.io/types-and-typeclasses.html)


> The `[Char]` type is synonymous with `String`


> ```
> -- function type declaration
> addThree :: Int -> Int -> Int -> Int  
> addThree x y z = x + y + z
> -- fn definition
> ```

Looks like functions are [curried](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Currying).

Fun fact: Haskell was named after [Haskell Curry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haskell_Curry)

> A typeclass is a sort of interface that defines some behavior. If a type is a part of a typeclass, that means that it supports and implements the behavior the typeclass describes.

So like a typescript `interface` or a rust `trait` 

> Everything before the => symbol is called a class constraint.

## [Syntax in Functions](https://learnyouahaskell.github.io/syntax-in-functions.html)

Looks like hitting an un-handled branch of pattern matching throws an exception.
There are probably lints for such omissions.

Looks like `_` is used as the ignored variable.

> Guards are indicated by pipes that follow a function's name and its parameters. Usually, they're indented a bit to the right and lined up. A guard is basically a boolean expression. If it evaluates to True, then the corresponding function body is used. If it evaluates to False, checking drops through to the next guard and so on.

Neat!

> `where` bindings are a syntactic construct that let you bind to variables at the end of a function and the whole function can see them, including all the guards. `let` bindings let you bind to variables anywhere and are expressions themselves, but are very local, so they don't span across guards.

```hs
x = let a = 1 in a + 1 -- x == 2
```

> If we want to bind to several variables inline [...] we can separate them with semicolons.
> ```
> (let a = 100; b = 200; c = 300 in a*b*c, let foo="Hey "; bar = "there!" in foo ++ bar)  
> -- (6000000,"Hey there!")
> ```

`case` expressions seem to be directly analogous to rust's `match` expressions:

```hs
case expression of pattern -> result  
                   pattern -> result  
                   pattern -> result  
                   ...
```

## [Higher order functions](https://learnyouahaskell.github.io/higher-order-functions.html)

> Infix functions can also be partially applied by using sections. To section an infix function, simply surround it with parentheses and only supply a parameter on one side. That creates a function that takes one parameter and then applies it to the side that's missing an operand. 
> ```hs
> divideByTen :: (Floating a) => a -> a  
> divideByTen = (/10)  
> ```

"lambdas" = anonymous fns; written like 
```hs
--  v starting \
   (\arg -> result expr)
-- ^                   ^ always parenthesized
```

> [Haskell does] function composition with the . function, which is defined like so:
> ```hs
>    (.) :: (b -> c) -> (a -> b) -> a -> c  
>    f . g = \x -> f (g x)
> ```

>```hs
>($) :: (a -> b) -> a -> b  
>f $ x = f x
>```
>Whereas normal function application (putting a space between two things) has a really high precedence, the `$` function has the lowest precedence. Function application with a space is left-associative (so `f a b c` is the same as `((f a) b) c))`, function application with `$` is right-associative. ... Most of the time, `$`'s a convenience function so that we don't have to write so many parentheses.
> When a `$` is encountered, the expression on its right is applied as the parameter to the function on its left. How about `sqrt 3 + 4 + 9`? This adds together 9, 4 and the square root of 3. If we want to get the square root of 3 + 4 + 9, we'd have to write `sqrt (3 + 4 + 9)` or if we use `$` we can write it as `sqrt $ 3 + 4 + 9` because `$` has the lowest precedence of any operator. That's why you can imagine a `$` being sort of the equivalent of writing an opening parenthesis and then writing a closing one on the far right side of the expression.

^ this clears up a _lot_!


## [Modules](https://learnyouahaskell.github.io/modules.html)

Note: the `Prelude` module is imported by default.
Note: module paths are separated by `.`s, e.g. `Data.List`.

```hs
import Data.List (nub, sort)
import Data.List hiding (nub)
import qualified Data.Map
-- if we want to reference Data.Map's filter function, we have to
-- do `Data.Map.filter`
import qualified Data.Map as M -- `M.filter`
```
```hs
module ModName ( -- must be same name as file.hs? MUST be capitalized
  exported
  , fn
  , names
  , Thing(..) -- all the value constructors for Thing
) where
```

Multi-module groups are directories of `ModName.hs` files, imported like `import GroupName.ModName`.

## making our own types and typeclasses

>  if we add deriving (Show) at the end of a data declaration, Haskell automagically makes that type part of the Show typeclass.


> ```hs
> data Person = Person { firstName :: String  
>                      , lastName :: String  
>                      , age :: Int  
>                      , height :: Float  
>                      , phoneNumber :: String  
>                      , flavor :: String  
>                      } deriving (Show)
> ```


> type constructors can take types as parameters to produce new types
> ```hs
> data Maybe a = Nothing | Just a
> --    type ^ parameter
> ```

> A type can be made an instance of a typeclass if it supports that behavior. Example: the `Int` type is an instance of the `Eq` typeclass because the `Eq` typeclass defines behavior for stuff that can be equated.
>
> -- [derived instances](https://learnyouahaskell.github.io/making-our-own-types-and-typeclasses.html#derived-instances)


> When I talk about **concrete types** I mean like fully applied types

So concrete types don't have any free type parameters, but type constructors may have further free type parameters.

```hs
class Eq equatable where
    ...
```
^ this is how to define a typeclass, noting that `equatable` is a type parameter.
```hs
class (Eq a) => Num a where  
    ...    
instance Eq (Maybe m) where
    ...
```
^ defining instances / implementations of a typeclass.

> the `Functor` typeclass, which is basically for things that can be mapped over. ... 
> ```hs
> class Functor f where  
>   fmap :: (a -> b) -> f a -> f b
> ```
> the f is not a concrete type (a type that a value can hold, like Int, Bool or Maybe String), but a type constructor that takes one type parameter.

---

This is enough for me to read further, so I'm stopping for now.

[repo]: https://github.com/snowleopard/build
[paper]: https://www.cambridge.org/core/services/aop-cambridge-core/content/view/097CE52C750E69BD16B78C318754C7A4/S0956796820000088a.pdf/build-systems-a-la-carte-theory-and-practice.pdf
[site]: https://learnyouahaskell.github.io/types-and-typeclasses.html

[starting-out]: https://learnyouahaskell.github.io/starting-out.html