---
tags: [
  copyright,
  reuse,
]
---

TL;DR: slap copyright comments on files and vendor licenses into a top-level `LICENSES/${spdx_id}.${ext}` directory.

-----

The [SPDX spec v2.3](https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v2.3/using-SPDX-short-identifiers-in-source-files/#e4-representing-multiple-licenses) references [the REUSE spec v3](https://reuse.software/spec/).

> Alternatively, you can use a`LicenseRef-`custom license identifier to refer to a license that is not on the SPDX License List, such as the following:
> 
> ```
> SPDX-License-Identifier: LicenseRef-my-special-license
> ```
> 
> The`LicenseRef-`format is defined in Annex[D](https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v2.3/SPDX-license-expressions/). When using a custom`LicenseRef-`identifier, you will also need to provide a way for others to determine what license text corresponds to it.[Version 3.0 of the REUSE Software Specification](https://reuse.software/spec/)provides a standardized format that can optionally be used for providing the corresponding license text for these identifiers.

The REUSE spec has the following interesting points:

> A Project MUST include a License File for every license under which Covered
Files are licensed.
>
> Each License File MUST be placed in the`LICENSES/`directory in the root of the Project.
> The name of the License File MUST be the SPDX License Identifier of the license followed by an appropriate file extension (example:`LICENSES/GPL-3.0-or-later.txt`). 
> The License File MUST be in plain text format.
>
> If a license does not exist in the SPDX License List, its SPDX License Identifier MUST be`LicenseRef-[idstring]`as defined by the SPDX Specification, Section 6 ...
>
> Each Covered File MUST have Copyright and Licensing Information associated with
it.
> There are two ways to associate Copyright and Licensing Information with a
file.
>
> ### Comment Headers
>
> To implement this method, each plain text file that can contain comments MUST
contain comments at the top of the file (comment header) that declare that
file’s Copyright and Licensing Information.
>
> If a file is not a plain text file or does not permit the inclusion of comments, the comment header that declares the file’s Copyright and Licensing Information SHOULD be in an adjacent file of the same name with the additional extension`.license`(example:`cat.jpg.license`if the original file is`cat.jpg`).
>
> The comment header MUST contain one or more`SPDX-FileCopyrightText`tags, and one or more`SPDX-License-Identifier`tags. 
> A tag is followed by a colon, followed by a text value, and terminated by a newline.
>
> Instead of the `SPDX-FileCopyrightText` tag, the symbol`©`, or the word `Copyright` MAY be used, in which case a colon is not needed.
>
> ```
> # SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2016, 2018-2019 Jane Doe <jane@example.com>
> # SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2019 Example Company
> #
> # SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later
> ```
> [...]
> ```
> © Example Corporation <https://corp.example.com>
> Copyright 2016, 2018-2019 Joe Anybody
> Copyright (c) Alice
> ```
>
> ### Dep5
> Alternatively, Copyright and Licensing Information MAY be associated with a file through a DEP5 file.[...]
> 
> The DEP5 file MUST be named`dep5`and stored in the`.reuse/`directory in the
> root of the Project (i.e.`.reuse/dep5`).
> 
> An example of a DEP5 file:
> ```
> Format: https://www.debian.org/doc/packaging-manuals/copyright-format/1.0/
> Upstream-Name: Project
> Upstream-Contact: Jane Doe <jane@example.com>
> Source: https://example.com/jane/project
>
> Files: po/*
> Copyright: 2019 Translation Company
> License: GPL-3.0-or-later
> ```

